docs: clarify where to configure metrics monitors (#18103)
apache/druid: docs/configuration/index.md

|[`druid.monitoring.monitors`](#metrics-monitors-for-each-service)|Sets list of Druid monitors used by a service.|none (no monitors)|
|[`druid.emitter`](#metrics-emitters)|Setting this value initializes one of the emitter modules.|`noop` (metric emission disabled by default)|

### Metrics monitors for each service

:::caution

Because each monitor is meant for a specific service or services, make sure you configure them for the correct service unless it is meant for any service. For example, if a monitor is meant for the Historical service, configure it in `historical/runtime.properties` rather than `_common/common.runtime.properties`.

:::

Metric monitoring is an essential part of Druid operations. The following table lists the monitors that are available and which service you should configure the monitor for:

|Name|Description|
|----|-----------|
|`org.apache.druid.client.cache.CacheMonitor`|Emits metrics (to logs) about the segment results cache for Historical and Broker services. Reports typical cache statistics include hits, misses, rates, and size (bytes and number of entries), as well as timeouts and and errors.|

> |`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.SysMonitor`|Reports on various system activities and statuses using the [SIGAR library](https://github.com/hyperic/sigar). Requires execute privileges on files in `java.io.tmpdir`. Do not set `java.io.tmpdir` to `noexec` when using `SysMonitor`.|

Author: ```suggestion
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.OshiSysMonitor`|Reports on various system activities and statuses using the [OSHI](https://github.com/oshi/oshi), a JNA-based (native) Operating System and Hardware Information library for Java. Requires execute privileges on files in `java.io.tmpdir`. Do not set `java.io.tmpdir` to `noexec` when using `SysMonitor`.|
```

|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupDiskMonitor`|Reports disk statistic as per the blkio cgroup.|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupMemoryMonitor`|Reports memory statistic as per the memory cgroup.|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2CpuMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports CPU usage from `cpu.stat` file. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2DiskMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports disk usage from `io.stat` file. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2MemoryMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports memory usage from `memory.current` and `memory.max` files. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|
|`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.HistoricalMetricsMonitor`|Reports statistics on Historical services. Available only on Historical services.|
|`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.SegmentStatsMonitor` | **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports statistics about segments on Historical services. Available only on Historical services. Not to be used when lazy loading is configured.|
|`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.QueryCountStatsMonitor`|Reports how many queries have been successful/failed/interrupted.|

> |`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.SubqueryCountStatsMonitor`|Reports how many subqueries have been materialized as rows or bytes and various other statistics related to the subquery execution|

Reviewer: +1

|`druid.broker.segment.awaitInitializationOnStart`|Boolean|Whether the Broker will wait for its view of segments to fully initialize before starting up. If set to 'true', the Broker's HTTP server will not start up, and the Broker will not announce itself as available, until the server view is initialized. See also `druid.sql.planner.awaitInitializationOnStart`, a related setting.|true|

## Metrics monitors

You can configure Druid services to emit [metrics](../operations/metrics.md) regularly from a number of [monitors](#metrics-monitors-for-each-service) via [emitters](#metrics-emitters). The following table lists general configurations for metrics:

|Property|Description|Default|
|--------|-----------|-------|
|`druid.monitoring.emissionPeriod`| Frequency that Druid emits metrics.|`PT1M`|
|[`druid.monitoring.monitors`](#metrics-monitors-for-each-service)|Sets list of Druid monitors used by a service.|none (no monitors)|
|[`druid.emitter`](#metrics-emitters)|Setting this value initializes one of the emitter modules.|`noop` (metric emission disabled by default)|

### Metrics monitors for each service

:::caution

> Because each monitor is meant for a specific service or services, make sure you configure them for the correct service unless it is meant for any service. For example, if a monitor is meant for the Historical service, configure it in `historical/runtime.properties` rather than `_common/common.runtime.properties`.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, agreed that this cautionary wording is confusing imo. It makes it sound like only the Historical-specific monitors need to be defined in the Historical config file. Actually, the reality is if you use _any_ Historical-specific monitors, then you need to add _all_ the monitors you want to the Historical config file, including the common ones (because the Historical `druid.monitoring.monitors` config overrides the common one, doesn't add to it).

IMO, it's ok to clarify this, rather than recommending that people always specify monitors in a service-specific way. The main reason is that our out-of-box configurations don't use any service-specific monitors- they have two defined in `druid.monitoring.monitors` in the common properties. The docs should use that as a starting point and then tell people how to think about adding more.

> Because each monitor is meant for a specific service or services, make sure you configure them for the correct service unless it is meant for any service. For example, if a monitor is meant for the Historical service, configure it in `historical/runtime.properties` rather than `_common/common.runtime.properties`.

Author: @abhishekrb19 we've had users reach out because they ran into issues from configuring monitors in `common/runtime.properties`, which is what prompted this PR.

I'll work on updating the wording.

> Because each monitor is meant for a specific service or services, make sure you configure them for the correct service unless it is meant for any service. For example, if a monitor is meant for the Historical service, configure it in `historical/runtime.properties` rather than `_common/common.runtime.properties`.

Author: [`3943b22` (#18103)](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18103/commits/3943b22a75b811c2d7104d186e52f46d998d9d49) clarifies that you need to list them all in a service if you want to use service specific ones

|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.JvmThreadsMonitor`|Reports Thread statistics in the JVM, like numbers of total, daemon, started, died threads.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupCpuMonitor`|Reports CPU shares and quotas as per the `cpu` cgroup.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupCpuSetMonitor`|Reports CPU core/HT and memory node allocations as per the `cpuset` cgroup.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupDiskMonitor`|Reports disk statistic as per the blkio cgroup.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupMemoryMonitor`|Reports memory statistic as per the memory cgroup.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2CpuMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports CPU usage from `cpu.stat` file. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2DiskMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports disk usage from `io.stat` file. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|Any|
|`org.apache.druid.java.util.metrics.CgroupV2MemoryMonitor`| **EXPERIMENTAL** Reports memory usage from `memory.current` and `memory.max` files. Only applicable to `cgroupv2`.|Any|

> |`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.HistoricalMetricsMonitor`|Reports statistics on Historical services. Available only on Historical services.|Historical|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`org.apache.druid.server.metrics.HistoricalMetricsMonitor`|Reports statistics on Historical services.|Historical|
```
